NAPLPS: A New Standard for Text and Graphics 
Part 4: More Advanced Features and Conclusions 
A standard way to encode color mapping and animation, closing with some predictions on how NAPLPS will be used by personal computers. 
This is the fourth and final part of this series of articles on NAPLPS, the North American Presentation-Level¡Protocol Syntax, a new communica¡tions standard for encoding both tex¡tual and graphics information. With this standard, graphics information can be sent from computer to com¡puter, or from peripheral to peripher¡al, with little regard to inherent dif¡ferences in the display capabilities of the various machines available. Such a standard will be particularly impor¡tant for proposed mass-market data¡communications systems such as videotex. 
The first part of the series presented an overview of NAPLPS. The second part gave a detailed analysis of its basic features . And last month, some of the advanced features of NAPLPS were discussed: This month I will continue that discussion and conclude with some predictions about the future of NAPLPS. 
About the Author 

Jim Fleming is a member of the ANSI X3L2 Committee on Character Sets and Coding. He is an independent consultant specializing in in¡teractive computing systems. 
272 May 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc 
Jim Heming Unir Corporation Suite 106 5987 East 71st St. Indianapolis, IN 46220 

These predictions are based on the premise that personal computing has not yet reached the majority of peo¡ple in the world. For that to happen, personal computers must be very easy to use. Those readers who may be dreaming about the day when everyone will be assembling S-100 kits and toggling in bootstrap pro-
INDEX  COLOR  
RED  GREEN  BLUE  

a  0 .2  0 .3  0.0  
4  0 .0  0 .0  0 .0  
5  0 .5  0 .8  O.S  
6  0.0  0.8  0.8  
25  1.0  1 .0  1.0  
26  0 .5  0 .5  0 .5  
27  0 .6  0.0  1 .0  
31  0 .0  1.0  0 .0  


Figure 1: A typical color table used with color modes 1 and 2 in NAPLPS. Each in¡dex value corresponds to a specific color. Note that the index values are arbitrary and that no index v alue appears more than once. Each color is represented as a mixture of the primary colors red, green, and blue. 
grams should probably reassess their thinking. 
Advanced Color Capabilities 
. As was mentioned in part 1, NAPLPS supports a variety of color modes. The most primitive one (mode 0) is quite portable and will be used in the majority of applications. As was previously described, colors are specified in color mode 0 by in¡dicating the relative amounts of red, green, and blue that should be mixed to form the desired color. 
Color modes 1 and 2, however, use a technique called color maps or color tables. As shown in figure 1, a color table is a set of indexes and their cor¡responding colors. These are tied together using the Set Color and Select Color commands. As can be seen in the figure, a given mixture of primary colors can be used more than once, and all the indexes do not have to be used. Note that the index value does not have any direct relationship with a hardware drawing value at this point. 
In order to make an entry in the color table, you must first use the Select Color command to specify a 
certain index (see figure 2). This index 
value is encoded in the byte or bytes 

following the command and usually 
ranges from 0 to 63, although indexes 
as high as 16,777,215 can be encoded. 
After an index is chosen, you can 
then use the Set Color command to 
specify the mixture of red, green, and 
blue values that should be associated 
with the index. 
When you want to select a color for 
drawing in color modes 1 and 2, you 
must specify the index for that col¡
or-not the actual color. The primary 
difference between modes 1 and 2 is 
that mode 2 allows you to specify a 
background color for text characters. 

As shown in figure 3, when a pic¡ture is drawn into display memory, a drawing value is allocated to each in¡dex . This value is written into the dis¡play memory. The color information currently associated with each index is put into a hardware register associ¡ated with each drawing value, and anything drawn with that display¡memory value will have that color. 
Note that a display value is allocated to an index only when drawing oc¡curs. Also, each display value is allocated to only one index. 
In order to create blinking and animation effects, the color associ¡ated with an index can be changed using the Select/Set sequence de-

SELECT COLOR 6 5 4 3 2 0 
OP CODE (3/14) I I I I I
X I 0 
o I

I I I 
x I  I  IMSB I  1 LSB I  DRAWING COLOR  
X I  I  IMSBI  1 LSB I  BACKGROUND COLOR (MODE 2 ONLY)  
OP  COD E (3 / 12)  6 5 IX I o I  SET 4 II  COLOR 2 I II  0 o I o I  

I
x I 
I 

G R B G B 
ò 
COLOR VALUE

ò 
I
X I 

G R B G R B 
Figure 2: The Select Color and Set Color commands used to specify a color-table index value and a red, green, and blue mixture, respectively. (The codes 3114 and 3112 are an alternate way of indicating the hexadecimal numbers 3E and 3C.) In color mode 2, two indexes can be specified in the Select Color command if a background color for text is desired. The normal sequence used to load the color table is to first select an index and then set a color for that index. These actions cause a relationship to be established be¡tween an index value and a color. After a table is set up, each set color can be used by using the Select command. Also, the color associated with each index value can be changed by using another Set Color command. 


00000000000 00000000000 00000000000 00000000030 00000000300 00000003000 00000030000 00000300000 00003002220 00030002220 00000002220 

DRAWING/COLOR VALUE 
HARDWARE
EXPANDED CO LOR MAP DISPLAY MEMORY DISPLAY SCREEN
COLOR TABLE 
Figure 3: A typical color-table implementation. Note that special color-map hardware is required. The drawing value is the one used when drawing occurs in the display memory. It is an index into the hardware-based color map. 
May 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc 273 




(GmpuP~.~_ J 
SYSTEMS CENTER 
SYSTEM 8/16A $4395. SYSTEM 8/168 $5245. SYSTEM 8/16C $6745.* FULLY ASSEM8LED AND TESTED * 
Lease-Purchase/Maintenance Avail. 
MORROW DESIGNS n 
MICROOECISION 2 $1185 with/Microsoft 8asic, 8azic, wordstar 3.0, Logical, Correct-it speller. Personal Pearl Data base manager. CP/M PILOT 
Crotnetnco C-10SP P.C. $1,500 CP/ M-LIKE D.S.. Word. Proc., Spell Checker, Financial Planner, 32K Structured 8asic 
SO Systems Disk-Less Computer CALL 
BOARDS: 
CCS Z80CPU $ 239 FULCRUM 64K Static Ram 8ank Select/Ext. Address $ 395 Scion Micro Angelo MA520 $ 965 
SO SYSTEMS 3 80 SET w/1 yr warranty: S8C 200 W / MONITOR PROM VERSAFLOPPY II w/CP/M3.0 & 810S 256 K EXPANDORAM III $1295.00 

PERIPHERALS -ETC. 
LIBERTY FREEDOM 100 
(emulates Televideo 925) 

PARA DYNAMICS 
MAINFRAMES VOTRAX SPEECH SYSTEM SSM TRANSMODEM 1200 
(HAYES COMPATIBLE) 
$ 535.00 
CALL $ 275 $ 519 
TANDON 100-2 DS/DD Drives 

for IBM-PC  $ 245.00  
GUME 8" Drives D.S.lDD  
Thinline 242  $ 445.00  
Standard 842  $ 445.00  

ALL DRIVES ONE YEAR WARRANTY 
FULL DEALER SUPPORT VISIT OUR SHOWROOM Hrò. 9:00 A.M.-!l:30 P.M. M-F 
Subject to Available Quantities Prices Quoted Include Cash Discounts Shipping & Insurance Extra 
Circle 399 on Inquiry card. 




~0"r.!.iJ"T~S -.DO 
Est. 1977 
14425 NDrth 78th Street. Suite B SaDHsdalòò ArizDna 85280 TELEX 185025 TECHNICAL 802-881-7870 SALES 800-528-3138 

274 May 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc 
Figure 4: The Blink command is used to establish one or more asynchronous blink pro¡cesses, These processes automatically modify the contents of the color map. In short, the Blink command causes the color of the current color index to be temporarily changed to that of the "to" color index. The on, off, and phase-delay times are specified in lIlO-second resolution, which allows this system to be compatible with both North American (60 frames per second) and European (50 frames per second) television sys¡tems. These times are used to control how often the color map is modified. 
scribed above. This change will cause everything on the display screen that has been drawn with that value to change color. 
Color-Table Animation 
The Blink command is used to set up automatic color-table animation sequences. As shown in figure 4, the Blink command is followed by several bytes that indicate a color¡table index, an on interval, an off in¡terval, and a phase delay. 
When the Blink command is speci¡fied, a process is established that coordinates the timing and interac¡tion that occur between two color¡table entries. The "from" color-table index is set to the current color index (i.e., the last selected index). The "to" color-table index is the index specified in the byte immediately following the Blink command. 
As shown in figure 5, the blink pro¡cesses are independent asynchronous activities that copy values from one entry in the color table to another. 
During the on interval, the color cor¡responding to the index specified by the "from" color is saved in an area of memory called the process-control block. Then the color corresponding to the index specified by the "to" in¡dex is copied to the "from" index. If the new color is different than the old color, a visual result will be seen. 
Similarly, during the off time, the color information saved in the pro¡cess-control block is restored to the color index specified by the "from" color. 
For simple blinks or flashing, the "to" color index can specify a con¡stant color that is used for copying purposes but not drawing. At this point it should be clear why hardware drawing values are not allocated to an index until actual drawing occurs. This technique allows each screen¡based color to have a unique "from/to" color pair without requir¡ing that colors be shared. 
If you are following carefully, you will note that, at the beginning of the 
BLINK PROCESSES 
FROM, 5 TO , 4 ON 0.1 SEC 
SAV E / RESTORE 
OFF 0.3 SEC 
1 
FROM: 6 TO: 5 
I¡
ON 0.2 SEC 

SAVE / RESTORE OFF 0.2 SEC 

1 

SAVE / RESTORE TO: 5 ON 1.0 SEC OFF 2.0 SEC 
FROM : 25 
)
-

Figure 5: An example of three blink processes used together. The first process saves the contents of the color map at index 5 and then copies the contents of index 4 into index 5. After 0.1 second, the original contents of index 5 are restored for 0.3 second. The second process saves the contents of the map at index 6 and copies the contents of index 5 into index 6. Note that the second process can copy the contents of index 5 during the time it has been changed by process 1, causing a variety of effects. The third process, which runs very slowly, saves the contents of index 25 and also copies the contents of index 5 into index 25. When changes are made to the colors in indexes 5, 6, and 25, the corresponding hardware color-map registers 12, 11, and 0 are changed, causing visual changes to the 
screen. 
on time, the color in the "to" color in¡dex is copied to the "from" color in¡dex. This copy is made independently of any blink activity that may be set for the "to" color. Thus, this copying could occur during a time when the "to" color has been changed by another blink process. The result is that multiple blink processes can be set up to allow colors to ripple around the color table in regular and irregular patterns. These patterns can be used to produce dramatic anima¡tion effects under full control of the terminal and without the need for host interaction. 
These animation effects, plus the other features described in the pre¡vious articles, should establish NAPLPS as the most extensive infor¡mation-exchange protocol available. As time goes on, it is expected that NAPLPS will replace ASCII (American National Standard Code change. As this occurs, almost every area of computing will be affected. In order to prepare for this impact, we need to look into the future to see how NAPLPS will help shape the world. 
for Information Interchange)  as  the  
standard  for  information  inter¡ 
276  May 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc  


Predictions and Conclusions 
If one sits back and attempts to pre¡dict the future of personal computing and information exchange, some ob¡vious predictions corne to mind: 
1. 
Integrated text and graphics will be essential in all visual information exchange. 

2. 
Personal computers must be de¡signed to be so easy to operate that a casual user can begin doing use¡ful things immediately. 

3. 
A personal computer will be used as a link to the rest of the world rather than a diversion from it. 

4. 
People's efficiency will be in¡creased by allowing concurrent ac¡tivities. 


S. The  average  personal  computer  
user will be  more  of a  consumer  
than a producer.  

It should be noted that I have said nothing about the size of memory chips or the density of disk drives. These predictions involve only func¡tionality and the user's view of com¡puting capability. I am a firm believer that the consumer will be the ultimate decision maker when the fate of the personal computing field is decided. These users will make these decisions based on what they see, hear, and touch. They will not make their deci¡sions based on how many chips are in a box or whether interrupts are en¡abled during DMA disk transfers. 
Using these predictions and a little imagination, we can hypothesize what the ultimate personal computer will be like. Figure 6 illustrates my view of such a machine. Four func¡tional servers are clustered around a central switching, control, and com¡putational unit. These four functional servers are not meant to indicate peripherals hanging on a microcom¡puter. In fact, they may instead be in¡tegrated into one unit. To put things into perspective, I imagine that each of the functional servers would have the complexity equal to or greater than that of an IBM Personal Com¡puter. 


The Hard-Copy, Communications, and File Servers are straightforward. Ideally, the Hard-Copy Server would support integrated text and graphics in high-resolution black and white. Color hard copy would be desirable, but I could probably live without it. The Communications Server would provide all links to off-site services through modems and local networks. The File Server would provide the typical storage and retrieval func¡
tions.  Features  such  as  automatic  
redundancy  and  backup  might  be  
transparent  to  the  user.  Database¡ 
management  capabilities  could  be  

built into the File Server, which would be responsible for organizing 
278 May 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc 
the database in the optimum way based on the user's answers to certain queries. 
The User-Interface Server would be an extremely high resolution color¡graphics display with a variety of user-input devices. All input editing would be handled by this server. The user should be able to enter text and graphics with equal ease. The ability to point to objects on the screen should be av~ilable from any of the input devices . And the User-Interface Server should be able to support multiple windows, representing various concurrent activities current¡ly in progress. 
The Central Computational Com¡ponent would be a multitasking sys¡tem with the computational capabili¡ty similar to most multiuser timeshar¡ing systems. A process (or task) would be active for each window in use in the User-Interface Server. Ad¡ditional processes could be created to perform tasks for the user. 
The Central Computational Com¡ponent would also be responsible for coordinating all server-to-server in¡teractions. It would also act on the user's behalf if some attention is need¡ed and the user is busy. For example, electronic mail received via the Com¡munications Server would be stored in the File Server without the user becoming involved. The user would be able to retrieve the mail at a later time. 
Given this model of an ultimate personal computer, it becomes useful to begin charting an evolutionary path from our current position to this ultimate system. It is obvious in figure 6 that the User Interface must be present in the system before any other component. It is not obvious that the user needs any other compo¡nent as long as the User Interface has access to a Central Computational Component. 
The first step along the evolu¡tionary path is to give the user a User¡Interface Server. From that day for¡ward, the user's view of the system begins to form. (The old adage "love at first sight" can be applied to com¡

CONNECTION  TECHNIQUES  
INTEGRAL  HARDWIRED (RS-232C)  
USER  INTERFACE  

D D NAPLPS CENTRAL
CENTRAL COMPUTATIONAL 

P=::::::::::::::::::-=;:::::::-;;:::;;"'-l COMPUTAT ION AL COMPONENT 

COMPONENT 
~ 
(b) 

MISCELLANEOUS NETWORK CABLE TV. SATELLITE . ETC . 
D 
NAPLPS 
CENTRAL COMPUTATIONA L COMPONENT 
-
(e) 

Figure 7: The User-Interface Server can be connected to the Central Computational Component in a variety of ways. A modem or a network arrangement allows a person to start using a User-Interface Server long before the Central Computational Component is 



needed. 
puters as well as people.) 
Because of this user view that is established, one is driven to give the user as much capability from day one as is economically feasible, even at the expense of not providing other components in the system. This strategy is compatible with the fact that a user will judge a system primarily from interaction with the User-Interface Server. 
Once a user is given a User-Inter¡face Server, another serious situation develops: the user will not want to give it up. This implies that when the user eventually obtains a Central Computational Component, he or she will expect the User-Interface Server to work with the new com¡ponent. 
What this all comes down to is that the user should be given the ultimate text/graphics terminal before any other component. The capabilities of 
282 May 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc 
this terminal should be standardized, and everything but the kitchen sink had better be available, because the capabilities of that terminal will help shape all future services. And the in¡terface to that terminal must be clear¡ly defined before any terminals are given out. 
This is where NAPLPS becomes in¡volved-as the text/graphics termi¡nal-interface protocol for the User¡Interface Server. As shown in figure 7, a NAPLPS terminal can be con¡nected via a variety of mechanisms to a Central Computational Compo¡nent. From the first day of use, the user sees a certain set of capabilities and begins to get used to the local editing features available in the ter¡minal. If a user is connected to a host via a modem, all computation and in¡formation are obtained from the remote host: The spectacular text/ graphics displays are there from the beginning and are not something the user must dream of having. 
From the host computer's point of view, the user is now a constant, a known entity with a standard inter¡face. Services can be developed with the assumption that the user will not be a moving target. This stability gives the developers of the host system more incentive to develop more services. More services attract more users, and more users of course mean more money, etc., etc. 
The user begins to consume the prepackaged information and ser¡vices. Most users may not want to become programmers or system ad¡ministrators; they merely want to ac¡complish a task and get on with the rest of their lives. 
At some point in life, however, a user may become more sophisticated and require a dedicated processor. A Central Computational Component can be purchased by the user and added to the original User-Interface Server. Many of the services that had been available on the remote host will probably be available on the dedicated processor. 
Additional servers could be added to the Central Computational Com¡ponent as the user desires. One inter¡esting thing to note is that the display capabilities of NAPLPS are such that the Hard-Copy Server can use the same protocol. Also, because the File Server will certainly be able to store NAPLPS, we see that a complete, in¡tegrated personal computing system begins to emerge. NAPLPS becomes the common language in the system for information interchange. 
The aQdition of the Communica¡tions Server is the mechanism by which a user and personal computer become an entity on a local-area net¡work. Keep in mind that the addition of the Communications Server allows a far more sophisticated system than when the user was remoted to a host via an unspecified network. The re¡moting was done to create the link be¡tween the User-Interface Server and the Central Computational Compo¡nent. The Communications Server was not involved. Figure 7 illustrates this difference. 

If I have not lost you completely and you are good at reading between the lines, it should be clear that NAPLPS is a small part of a large, in¡tegrated personal computing system. Many of the parts of that system still need to be specified and im¡plemented. Luckily, the part of most concern to users is quite mature and currently available in the market¡place. I predict that in three to four years systems similar to the one I have described will be commonplace in personal computing. 
Those of you who are familiar with the various videotex systems that have been proposed may realize that my ultimate personal computer would be fairly compatible with such systems. In most videotex systems, a network of inexpensive home ter¡minals with enhanced graphics capa¡bilities are connected to a host com¡puter. Ideally, the manufacturers of these terminals will design them so that at some later date the user can add the above-mentioned servers. 
As I said at the outset of this arti¡cle, personal computing has not yet reached the majority of people in the world-but someday it will. If you are currently a personal computer user, you should feel honored to be among the pioneers. As the personal computing field begins to evolve into a mass-market, consumer-oriented, network-based information system, do not be surprised if you begin to feel like the odd man out. Also, do not be surprised if one day your neighbors invite you over to see their new computer that costs one fourth to one tenth the price of yours and has access to thousands of services via networking. And do not get upset when you find out that your neigh¡bors cannot tell you which processor their computer uses or what transmis¡sion rates their modem supports. In¡stead, just feel good about the fact that you know a little bit about the language their computer uses to talk to the rest of the world . ò 



Save valuable time! 5 to 50 times faster performance than floppy disks and Winchester drives 
PION'S INTERSTELLAR DRIVE is des ig~ed for use with a family of interfaces and software packages. Currently avail¡able are interfaces for IBM, SI00, TRS80, Apple, SS50, and most Z80 uP, and software for mostPQPU laroperating systems. Additional interfaces are continually being developed for the most popular computers. 
SAVE MONEY! 

Basic Price for 256KB unit [Includes Interface and software]
Increase your 

$1095. plus tax (where applicable) and shipping \.111.1 1 VISA
computer's productivity Visa and Master Card accepted. __ The INTERSTELLAR DRIVE is a high performance 




PION 

data storage subsystem with independent power , INC. Tel.(617)923-8009 
supply, battery backup, a?d error detecti?n. It has 101 RWalnut St. Watertown MA02172 256KB to I Megabyte of sohd state memory Integrated TRS80 trademark of Tandy CO; }. Apple trademark a/ APple Computers to perform with your operating system. Interstellar Drive trademark of PION, Inc. 
284 May 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc 
Circle 362 on inquiry card. 



