

NAPLPS: A New Standard for Text and Graphics 
Part 3: Advanced Features 
NAPLPS can draw irregular lines, compress repeated code segments, define new text characters, and divide the display screen into separate fields. 
The North American PresentationŁLevel-Protocol Syntax (NAPLPS) is a communications standard that can encode both text and graphics. The goal of this standard is to facilitate the exchange of information from one machine to another without regard to differences in the individual graphicsŁhandling capabilities of each machine. In fact, in some ways NAPLPS can be viewed as an extenŁsion of the American National StanŁdard Code for Information InterŁchange (ASCII). 
Part 1 of this series presented an overview of NAPLPS. In part 2 I deŁscribed the basic features of NAPLPS with an emphasis on the actual coding. In this part I will concentrate on the more advanced features of NAPLPS, specifically, Incremental Lines, Macros, Dynamically RedefinŁable Characters, and Fields. This artiŁcle will present merely an overview of these advanced features. In order to 
About the Author 
Jim Fleming is a member of the ANSI X3L2 Committee on Character Sets and Coding. He is an independent consultant specializing in inŁteractive computing systems. 
190 April 1983 ®BYTE Publications Inc 
Jim Heming Unir Corporation Suite 106 5987 East 71st St. 
Indianapolis, IN 46220 

get a complete description of them, you should obtain a copy of the acŁtual NAPLPS document from the Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association (CBEMA), whose address is listed at the end of this article. 
Incremental Lines 
As we saw in part 2, line drawings and objects can be encoded by speciŁfying the endpoints of each line using a terminal-independent coordinate system. In general, it takes about 3 bytes to encode each line in a drawŁing. For objects with only a few sides or a regular shape (i.e., rectangle, arc, etc.), this efficient approach makes it easy to encode lines. But if an object has an irregular shape, the normal encoding method becomes very inefficient. 
NAPLPS supports a method of chain-encoding irregular edges of shapes. An assumption is made that the irregular edge is composed of a large number of small line segments. Each segment can be encoded using just 2 bits of information-a substanŁtial reduction over the 3 bytes needed using the normal method. 
The method for chain-encoding line Ęsegments with 2 bits is shown in table 1. The first step is to establish a pair of relative coordinates (symŁbolized as dx, dy) that determines the length of the line segments. Multiple 2-bit values are then specified that inŁdicate directions in which to draw the line segments. As shown in table 1, a line segment can be drawn horizonŁtally, vertically, or diagonally. 
If a horizontal segment is specified, it is drawn in the direction initially set by the value dx. If dx is positive, the horizontal segment will be drawn to the right; if dx is negative, the segŁment will be drawn to the left. 
If you are following closely, you may be asking how we could get lines drawn to the left if .e initially specify dx as positive. As shown in table 2, an Escape sequence is provided to reverse the direction of the drawing. Any time a 2-bit value is 00, the next 2 bits are interpreted as an instruction to change direction. The sequence 00 01 indicates that the horizontal direcŁtion should be reversed, the sequence 00 10 changes the vertical direction, and the sequence 00 11 reverses both directions. 
Circle 185 on inquiry card. -. 
'0

Two-Bit Incremental Line Instructions 
Symbolic Two-Bit Code Encoding Result 
00 Change dx or dy values ( see table 2 ) 
-dx-
X 01 
y 10 
tL

D 11 dy or 
+ dx Ł

Table 1: With the Incremental-Line features of NAPLPS, some line segments can be specified with just 2 bits of information. The values dx and dy signify relative coorŁdinates. If dx is negative, the line will be drawn to the left; if dy is negative, the line will be drawn downward. Other lines can be drawn by using the 4-bit direction changing codes shown in table 2. 
Incremental Line Escape sequences 
Symbolic Four-Bit 

Code Encoding Result 
00 00 If pen is down, then lift it up. 
If pen is up, then put it down. 
-X 00 01 dx = -dx 

00 10 dy = -dy 
-D 00 11 dx = -dx, dy = -dy 
Table 2: Four-bit codes .re used to change the direction of the drawing and control the pen position. 
If you are still with me, you may ask what happens when 00 is folŁlowed by 00. That sequence indicates that the state of the pen should be reversed. If the pen is currently down, it will be raised; if the pen is up, it will be lowered. 
The 2-bit values are encoded in a series of bytes, 6 bits per byte (from left to right in table 3). The pen is assumed to be down at the beginning of a command. The last byte can be padded with a pen reversal if the number of line segments is not even. 
Figure 1 shows a chain-encoded outline of the state of Indiana that is composed of 217 short line segments. These 217 segments require 87 bytes of coding in NAPLPS. If I had enŁcoded this drawing using the normal 



Figure 1: An example of an incremental-line drawing. The size can be changed simply by changing the values of the relative coordinates dx and dy. This drawing was done on 



a Diablo 630. 
method, 651 (217 X 3) bytes would have been needed. (Although these calculations ignore the fact that the northeast corner of the state could be efficiently drawn with normal straight lines, a large amount of memŁory would be required nonetheless.) 
A symbolic representation of part of the chain encoding for figure 1 apŁpears in table 3. It is the coding for part of the southwestern border of Indiana. The corresponding binary and octal values of the encoding are also included. The two outlines were produced from the same encoded data. 
The scaling effect achieved in figure 1 was accomplished by changing the size of the dx and dy values. As shown in figure 2, the IncrementalŁLine op code (3A hexadecimal or 3/10 using a 16 by 16 column/row repreŁsentation) and a relative coordinate pair (dx, dy) precede the encoded data. This (dx, dy) value can be changed to create some interesting efŁfects. For example, It can be scaled so that the resulting drawing is larger or smaller, even though the same enŁ
194 April l983 ®BYTE Publiaotions Inc 
coded data is used. Also, the values of dx and/or dy can be negative, resulting in mirror-image drawings from the same encoded data. The values of dx and dy can be very difŁferent, resulting in a stretching effect in one of the dimensions. 
Besides chain-encoded outlined drawings, NAPLPS also supports chain-encoded filled polygons. These solid figures are subject to the same attributes of objects such as rectŁangles and arcs. These attributes can be used to draw the state of Indiana with a textured interior to help distinguish it from other objects on the screen or page. 
Incremental encoding is a powerful technique for compactly representing irregular objects. The efficiency obŁtained by incremental encoding pays off in data-transmission time and disk storage. Another feature of NAPLPS that improves coding efficiency is the Macro capability. 
Macros 
Macros provide a means of storing an arbitrary string of NAPLPS codes 
Sample of Incremental Line Encoding 
Symbolic Binary Octal 
Code Code Code 

-y 
D X1 oo 10 n 113 
-y y 
X1 00 10 10 112 
Y D X X1 10 n 01 155 
X-y X1 01 00 10 122 
y 
D -X1 10 n oo 154 
y D -X1 10 11 00 154 
X D -X1 01 11 00 134 
X D-X1 01 11 00 134 
YYX X1 10 10 01 151 
X X D X1 01 01 n 127 
XDX X1 01 n 01 135 
X-y X1 01 00 10 122 
Y D D X1 10 11 n 157 
Table 3: An example of incremental-
line coding. This is part of the coding 
used to produce the drawing of Indiana 
in figure 1. 

under one of 96 names. The string can be recalled using the 1-byte name associated with the string. 
Macros are useful when a common string of NAPLPS codes is used for a particular application. For example, in a home-banking application the words Balance, Amount, Ętand PayŁment will appear m.ny times during a session. NAPLPS lets us store these words as macros and recall them by transmitting just 1 byte. 
Macros can be used to store both text and graphics. Entire screens of inŁ




Figure 2: Structure of the Incremental-Line instructions. The first byte indicates that a series of Incremental-Line instructions will follow. The next series of bytes indicates the size of the relative coordinates dx and dy to whatever resolution is desired. The last series of bytes is composed of the actual 2-and 4-bit drawing instructions. 
15
DEFINE CHARACTER 
POSITION (0, .2)
LINE (0, .3)
LINE (.15, 0) 
LINE (0,-.3)" 

ARC (.05,-.05)(.05,.05) 
.LINE 
(0,.3) 
END 


Figure 3: Using the Dynamically Redefinable Character Set (DRCS) capability of NAPLPS, we can define our own characters. 

WELCOME 


ORCS TEMPLATES 
TO 
CORPORATION 

DISPLAY SCREEN 

Figure 4: Once a DRCS set has been defined, its characters can be mapped just like text characters onto the display screen. 
196 Apriln1983 ®BYTE Publications Inc 
formation can be stored as one macro. In addition, other text and graphics can be intermixed with macros. 
In applications like adventure games, each time a new room is entered, a macro can be defined with the picture of the room. If the room is reentered later in the game, the long graphics-and-text description does not have to be retransmitted. The host computer simply has to refer to the macro name and the entire room is drawn. 
If the host computer is really smart, it can send down macros for all the rooms that are near the current room you are in. This can be done while you are deciding your next move. The screen will not be changed as these macros are defined. When you finally move to a new room, the host refers to the proper macro that was previously defined, and the user sees an almost instant response. 
Macros can also be applied in conŁjunction with the Incremental-Line op code described earlier. Nothing prevents you from storing just the enŁcoded data as a macro. If this is done, an Incremental-Line op code (3/10) can be sent followed by a (dx, dy) coordinate value followed by the macro reference. In the previous exŁample (Indiana), the 87 bytes of enŁcoded data would be retrieved and processed as if they had been sent after the (dx, dy) value. Thus, the size of the shape could be changed almost instantaneously. 
Part 1 of this series includes an exŁample of macro definition and referŁence. A NAPLPS code segment for that example is shown in listing 1. As you may recall, a macro (Macro 26) was defined that cleared the screen to blue and put the string "READY:" on the screen in white. Whenever Macro 26 is later referenced, the screen will be cleared and "READY:" will apŁpear. 
The amount of storage allocated to macros has been left open as a terminal-and application-dependent parameter. With 96 macro names and the ability to store long variableŁlength strings, the macro storage reŁquired could exceed the internal memory capacity of most. personal computers. There is absolutely no


Listing 1: A short segment of NAPLPS code (in octal form) showing how a macro can 
be defined and referenced. The contents of Macro 26 will be bytes 4 to 21 inclusive. reason why disk storage cannot be used to store macros. When disks are 
used, a crude form of file transfer begins to emerge. 
Macros thus provide a Ępowerful 

BYTE OCTAL SYMBOLIC DESCRIPTION 
capability of code reduction when
fl FORM FORM 
using NAPLPS. The important thing to remember about macros is that a simple string replacement is perŁ


017 SI Select GO (Text) 
***** Define Macro 26 ***** 

formed. The resulting stream of code (after the macro expansion) is proŁ
033 ESC Define Macro 26 cessed as if it had been sent from the 
2 100 DFM host. No special scaling, rotation, or 3 072 M26 
attributes are applied to the macro part of the resuhing stream. In fact, in most systems, once. the macro is exŁ

4 016 so Select G1 (Graphics) panded all knowledge is lost that a 
macro was used. 
Dynamically Redefinable

5 074 SET Set color to Blue 
6 111 BLU Character Sets 
The Dynamically Redefinable Character Set (ORCS) capability in NAPLPS is similar to the Macro feaŁ

7 040 RES Clear Screen to in-use color 
ture. The ORCS facility allows arŁ
8 120 
bitrary streams of NAPLPS code to be associated with one of 96 names. The 96 ORCS names, however, are 

9 074 SET Set color to white 
completely different from the macro
10 177 
names. 
The primary difference between macros and ORCS characters is that 

11 044 SPA Set Point Absolute 
when the ORCS image is referenced, 
12 101 } 
it is scaled, rotated, and mapped to

13 110 } -(x ,y) = ( .05078125, .25) => (13,64) 
14 150 } the current character field, just like a 
text character. In other words, a simŁple code replacement is not perŁ
f,ormed. Instead, the current environŁ
ment of attributes and character-field size is used when the ORCS characŁter is requested. Figures 3 and 4 show 
122 R 
an application of the ORCS capability. 
16 
17 105 E 
One of the primary functions of the 
18 101 A 

104 D ORCS is to define new text characŁ
20 131 y 21 072 

22 033 ESC End Macro Definition 23 105 END 
ters, because all TEXT command atŁtributes (scaling, rotation, spacing, etc.) are applied when the ORCS is reŁquested. Because of this text-charŁacter orientation, only two colors can be used when the ORCS is drawn. In other words, the drawing of the ORCS is done with a "spray-paint" 

Referencing the Macro ***** technique, as with other characters. 
The ORCS thus acts only as a stencil. 
The ORCS can also be viewed as a 
simplified form of the computerŁ

SS3 Assume 7 Bit Mode with Macros in G3
?? 
graphics idea of a window and a
Macro 26?? 072 M26 
viewport. When using a ORCS, the 
Text continued on page 202 
198 April 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc 



of course, will help differentiate various companies' products. It would be an extremely boring worldtif NAPLPS were so restrictive that
. 
every terminal looked and performed 
THE 
THIS
THIS 
I
I 
exactly the same. 
Fields 
The last advanced feature to be disŁ
cussed here is Fields. Fields are logical 
I 
I 
L 
I 
DOES NOT SCROLL 
rectangular areas defined on the unit screen by the Field command (3/8). These areas are not visible to the user. Only one active field exists although, as will be seen, multiple fields can be defined as long as they do not

Figure 5: In NAPLPS, some fields of the display screen can be scrolled; others remain 

stationary. 
window is completely mapped to the viewport, which is mapped to the character field on the screen. Figure 4 illustrates this mapping. Because the character field can cover an area from one pixel (pictllre element) to the entire screen, .a scaling effect is achieved. 
The ORCS capability is another method for reducing the transmission time of data sent from the host. In apŁplications that require many special symbols, the symbols can be defined, given a name, and referenced witht. only 1 byte-even for a symbol that may require hundreds of bytes of definition. By replacing the hundreds of bytes with a single one, the transmission is compressed to the point that the users think they are connected to the host by a high-speed link. 

Two popular methods of handling ORCS in terminals are available. The first method cuts the template as soon as the ORCS is defined. When the ORCS is requested, the previously cut template is retrieved and handled like any other 
character-definition template. The templates are usually . s.ored on 8 by 8 or 16 by 16 grids inŁternally in the terminal. 
The second method for handling ORCS is to store the graphics comŁmands themselves. No template is cut. When a ORCS is requested, the template is cut in a size appropriate for the current character field. The template may be 32 by 32, or even 256 by 256 for full-screen ORCS. 
202 Aprilnl983 ® BYTE Publications Inc 
Once this template is cut, it is mapped to the display screen using the sprayŁpaint concept. 
The primary difference between these two methods appears in the areas of speed and resolution. The first method is good when ORCS characters must be displayed very fast and with minimum resolution. If the ORCS is scaled to a much larger size, however, a crude image results from the precut template. The crude image results from the fact that some of the information may be lost when the cutting is performed, especially if the template is very small. 
The second method preserves all
Ętthe information by maintaining the ORCS definition in its original form. If a large ORCS is requested (i.e., the character field is large), all the original information can be used to draw the character. The disadvantage of this method is that the original definition has to be decoded each time the ORCS is requested. This can be quite time consuming for a ORCS that contains several hundred bytes of definition. These two methods are not the only ways of handling ORCS. As with most features of NAPLPS, no restriction is placed on the method of implementation. The cleverness of the implementation will determine how much of the original information is transferred to the user. The approŁpriate time, space, and cost trade-offs have to be made in choosing impleŁmentation strategies. These decisions, 
overlap. Fields are used in a variety of ways in NAPLPS. 
A common use of the Field capabilŁity is for setting margins. The Field command is used to establish the curŁrent active field, which is normally the entire screen. Each time a text character is placed on the screen, an internal cursor position is updated. If the boundaries of the field are exŁceeded, the cursor is moved to the other edge of the field in a manner compatible with most data terminals. If the cursor moves beyond the top or bottom of the field, a feature called partial screen scrolling comes into play. If scrolling is enabled, only the information inside the field is scrolled. The information around the field is not changed. Figure 5 attempts to show this concept. 
Fields are also used to establish an area for high-resolution image disŁplay. The Incremental-Point comŁmand (3/9) can be used to specify the color information for each point inŁside a given field. In applications like real-estate listings, these features can be used to combine a photographicŁlike picture of a house with textual inŁformation concerning the same. Figure 6 illustrates a result that can be obtained. 
But the most important use of the Field capability is for user input in systems such as videotex. As deŁscribed in part 1, users are given one or more blank "sheets of paper" on their screen. The Field command is used to define where these sheets are placed. 
When these so-called unprotected fields are placed on the screen, the 

NO. 1356-82 $115,000 



FIELD 
1234 Shady Lane 

4 bdrm, 2 112 Bath, 2 Story Brick I Cedar
Fireplace, Large Fenced Yard 
user is allowed to enter information. The user can also edit the information with any localt. capabilities provided by the terminal. Once the informaŁtion is entered, the user sends the conŁtents of the field to the host. 
Any legal NAPLPS stream can be placed in a field. In the example shown in figure 7, a person has used a bit pad to put a signatu're in the field. When the field is eventually sent to the host, the contents of the field 
would be an Incremental-Line comŁmand followed by a stream of data 
for the signature. 
If, on the other hand, the user had typed information into the field, the information would be sent to the host as characters from the Primary CharŁacter Set. 
The information that is sent to the host is identified with the location and dimensions of the field. If multiŁple 'fields are set up, the host is sent data only from the fields that are modified by the user. 
The Field capability provided in NAPLPS is extremely versatile. In comparing this capability with the fields commonly found on data-proŁcessing terminals, you should note two items. First, the fields described here are true two-dimensional areas on the screen. This is quite different from the typical one-and-one-halfŁdimensional fields found on most terŁminals. Figure 8 illustrates this difŁference. 
The other item of note is that NAPLPS places no restrictions on the user in regard to what type of inforŁmation can be placed into a field. The 


Figure 6: The Incremental-Point command can be used to specify the color information for each point inside a field. In an application such as real-estate listings, a photographic-quality picture of a house can be included with textual information. 

Figure 7: Input from a bit pad can be translated into a series of Incremental-Line inŁstructions and placed into an unprotected (user) field. 

DATA 

is REFORMATTEfl« Diskette Conversion Software 
cPtM 
IBM374o
CP/M DEC RT-11
CP/M-86* 
IBM3740
TRSDOS CP/M

Ģ 
.Avoids serial communication protocols. 

Ģ 
Needs only .m. system to trar.sfer: data. 

Ģ 
Converts source code and data files. 


II
II
TRSDOS DEC RT-11 
Ģ Allows 2-way trar.sfer. 
CROMIX DEC RT-11
Ģ Quick, reliable, and inexpensive. 
PRICE: $249 '$350 
Requi.es B" fiOJ'lPY drive. 
(415) 324-91!T14 TWX: 91!T0-370-7457 

204 April 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc Circle 286 on inquiry card. 

NAPLPS has many other powerful features. It is impossible to cover all the features in the context of this series of articles. As I have indicated in the past, anyone who wants more information about NAPLPS, or who is interested in doing serious work with NAPLPS, should obtain a copy of the specification. Copies are available for $18 from 
DIMENSIONAL FIELDS X3 Secretariat 
CBEMA 

An example of the one-and-one-half-dimensionalafields found in most terŁ311 First St., NW
Figure 8: 
minal systems and the true two-dimensional fields possible with NAPLPS. Washington, DC 20001 (202) 737-8888t. 
options available to the user for you to enter, for example, alphabetic Next Month entering information into fields information into a numeric field. IntNAPLPS offers us a powerful new
Ę 

become merely terminal-dependent Ę contrast, the spirit of NAPLPS is to communications medium, one that features. Terminal manufacturers are allow free-form user input. should have a significant impact on thus able to provide unique input and Someday host computers may beŁthe amount and the type of informaŁediting facilities to distinguish their come smart enough to know that tion we can exchange among ourŁproducts. "100," "One hundred," and "1 hunŁselves. Next month, I will describe 
No facilities are available in dred" all mean the same thing. some of the advanced color capabilŁNAPLPS to specify the type of data NAPLPS will be ready to accommoŁities and speculate on the ways in that can be entered into a field. Many date this capability when it becomes which. NAPLPS will affect the data-processing terminals now forbid available. personal-computer user. Ģ 

12" B&W MONITOR 51f4"Fioppy MATRIX 

DISKETTES COEX BOĘFT PRINTER 
All Certified-1 00% Guaranteed ĢInterface with Apple;Ę Centronics 
Contrast Power/Bright RS-232, IEEE-488 
VĘHold 

$149░0 ,
BOX of 100 . .t. Ģ 9x7 Dot Matrix, 80 CPS, 
HĘHold 

Above with 1Ę 
VIDEO 100 by AMDEK Ģ 2K Buffered Memory /.


$7 995 ' 
Hub Rings ...t......$169.00 Bi-Directional Printing i II 1',.ŁĢ 80, 96, 132 qol_umns, Graphi.
FULL 
ĘĘ

FACTORY and Block Pnnt1ng 
WARRANTY Ģ Selectable Char Pitch, Line Spacing and Feed 
COEX Interface Card toAPPLE $49.95 
tor APPLE 


16K RAM CARD 
Language Transparent 

80x24 Video Display Card 
COEX FACTORY $6995 Vista Computer Company's newVision-80 board is a sophisticated 
WARRANTY yet easy to use video display card for the AppleN computer. 

PROTOTYPING CARDS EXTENDER CARDS 
EPSON TO APPLE 
INCLUDED 

for APFLE ...t. $1 9.95 for APPLE ..t.$16.95 for I.B.M ...... $49.95 for I.B.M .. ... $19.95 
COEX 


"Have You Kissed Your Computer Lately'' 



Components Express, Inc. 

-
.v/SA" 1380 E. Edinger Ģ Santa Ana, Calif. 92705 Ģ 71 4/558-3972 
Terms of Sale: Cash, Checks, Credit Cards, M.O., C.O.D. Calif. residents add 6% sales tax. 
206 April 1983 ® BYTE Publications Inc 
Circle 87 on inquiry card. 

